.TH AJ 1 "2026-03-14" "ajentwork" "Agent Work Tracker" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
aj \- agent work tracker with optional Jira sync
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aj
<command> [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Track agent work locally in a compact, git\-friendly format with built\-in help, workflows, and optional Jira interoperability. Write work items and updates so another agent can pick up the task without rediscovering all the context.
The primary interactive help surfaces remain `aj \-\-help`, `aj help <command>`, `aj workflows`, and `aj examples`. This man page is a generated offline companion.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS ARTIFACTS
.B aj artifacts <id> [\-\-limit <n>]
Show the durable artifacts and execution receipts recorded for a work item so another agent can inspect evidence quickly.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-limit <n>
optional max number of artifacts to return; default 20
.RE
.SS ATTACH
.B aj attach <id> \-\-path <path> \-\-summary <summary> [\-\-label <label>]
Copy a supporting file such as a log, patch, screenshot, or note into .aj/artifacts and record a compact summary so another agent can inspect the evidence later.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-path <path>
required file path to copy into .aj/artifacts
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required compact explanation of why the artifact matters
.TP
.B \-\-label <label>
optional short label for the artifact
.RE
.SS BLOCK
.B aj block <id> \-\-summary <summary> [\-\-on <id>] [\-\-next <action>] [\-\-jira\-comment|\-\-no\-jira\-comment]
Move a local work item into blocked status and optionally attach a dependency that explains what must finish first. Blocking updates should explain why progress stopped and what condition unblocks it.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required one\-line blocker summary
.TP
.B \-\-on <id>
optional dependency item identifier to attach and wait on
.TP
.B \-\-next <action>
optional replacement next action; defaults to waiting on the dependency when \-\-on is used
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-comment
post the same summary to the linked Jira issue after blocking
.TP
.B \-\-no\-jira\-comment
suppress Jira milestone comment even if the repo policy enables it
.RE
.SS CHANGES
.B aj changes [\-\-item <id>] [\-\-since <rfc3339>] [\-\-limit <n>]
List compact recent changes from the append\-only event log so agents can understand what happened without inspecting each item manually.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-item <id>
optional work item identifier to limit the feed to one item
.TP
.B \-\-since <rfc3339>
optional lower time bound for returned events
.TP
.B \-\-limit <n>
optional max number of events to return; default 20
.RE
.SS CHECKPOINT
.B aj checkpoint <id> \-\-summary <summary> [\-\-next <action>] [\-\-risk <text> ...] [\-\-verify <text> ...]
Capture what changed, what remains risky, and what the next agent should verify so work can resume cleanly later even if ownership does not change yet.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required compact checkpoint summary
.TP
.B \-\-next <action>
optional replacement next action for whoever resumes the work
.TP
.B \-\-risk <text>
optional remaining risk or uncertainty; repeat as needed
.TP
.B \-\-verify <text>
optional thing the next agent should verify; repeat as needed
.RE
.SS DONE
.B aj done <id> \-\-summary <summary> [\-\-jira\-comment|\-\-no\-jira\-comment]
Mark a local work item done, record its completion summary, and clear its next action. Completion summaries should say what shipped or was verified so later agents do not need to rediscover the outcome.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required one\-line completion summary
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-comment
post the same summary to the linked Jira issue after completion
.TP
.B \-\-no\-jira\-comment
suppress Jira milestone comment even if the repo policy enables it
.RE
.SS HANDOFF
.B aj handoff <id> \-\-to <agent> \-\-summary <summary> [\-\-next <action>] [\-\-ttl 4h] [\-\-jira\-comment|\-\-no\-jira\-comment]
Assign a new lease owner with a handoff summary so another agent can continue the work without ambiguity. Handoff summaries should explain what is done, what is risky, and what to check next.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-to <agent>
required destination agent name
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required compact handoff summary
.TP
.B \-\-next <action>
optional replacement next action for the receiving agent
.TP
.B \-\-ttl <duration>
optional lease duration such as 30m or 4h; default 4h
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-comment
post the same summary to the linked Jira issue after handoff
.TP
.B \-\-no\-jira\-comment
suppress Jira milestone comment even if the repo policy enables it
.RE
.SS INBOX
.B aj inbox [\-\-agent <name>]
Show a compact queue of owned, stale, waiting, and available work items so an agent can decide what to act on next.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-agent <name>
optional agent name; if provided, owned items for that agent are highlighted
.RE
.SS INIT
.B aj init [\-\-repo <path>] [\-\-force] [\-\-jira \-\-jira\-base\-url <url> \-\-jira\-space\-key <key> [\-\-jira\-space\-name <name>] [\-\-jira\-space\-type <type>] [\-\-jira\-space\-template <template>] [\-\-ensure\-jira\-space]]
Bootstrap a repository for aj by creating the .aj directory tree, default config, cache directory, and artifact directories. When Jira is part of the workflow, init can also record the Jira site and space key, and optionally ensure that the Jira space exists before work starts.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-repo <path>
initialize aj in a specific repository path instead of the current working directory
.TP
.B \-\-force
overwrite an existing config file if present
.TP
.B \-\-jira
enable Jira support in the new .aj/config.toml
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-base\-url <url>
set the Jira Cloud base URL such as https://example.atlassian.net
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-space\-key <key>
set the Jira space/project key to reuse or create
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-space\-name <name>
human\-readable Jira space/project name to use when creating a missing space
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-space\-type <type>
optional Jira project type such as software; default software when ensuring a space
.TP
.B \-\-jira\-space\-template <template>
optional Jira project template key; required for some non\-software project types
.TP
.B \-\-ensure\-jira\-space
check whether the Jira space key exists and create it if missing
.TP
.B \-\-format brief|json|prompt
render the result in the requested output format
.RE
.SS LINK
.B aj link <id> (\-\-depends\-on <id> | \-\-parent <id>)
Record either a dependency edge or a parent\-child hierarchy edge so aj can understand readiness and work decomposition.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-depends\-on <id>
record that the item cannot start until the dependency is done
.TP
.B \-\-parent <id>
record that the item is a child of the given parent or epic item
.RE
.SS LS
.B aj ls
List compact local work item summaries sorted by priority and recency.
.SS NEW
.B aj new \-\-kind <kind> \-\-title <title> \-\-goal <goal> \-\-next <action> [\-\-accept <text> ...] [\-\-constraint <text> ...] [\-\-risk <text> ...] [\-\-file <path> ...] [\-\-verify <text> ...] [\-\-priority 2]
Create a new local aj work item with a compact snapshot and an initial created event. The title, goal, and next action should give another agent enough context to start confidently, and structured fields should capture acceptance criteria, constraints, risks, relevant files, and verification expectations whenever they matter.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-kind <kind>
required item kind: bug, feature, task, spike, or epic
.TP
.B \-\-title <title>
required short work item title
.TP
.B \-\-goal <goal>
required problem statement or desired outcome
.TP
.B \-\-next <action>
required immediate next action for the agent
.TP
.B \-\-accept <text>
optional acceptance criterion; repeat to capture multiple outcomes
.TP
.B \-\-constraint <text>
optional implementation or product constraint; repeat as needed
.TP
.B \-\-risk <text>
optional known risk or uncertainty; repeat as needed
.TP
.B \-\-file <path>
optional relevant file path or area to inspect first; repeat as needed
.TP
.B \-\-verify <text>
optional verification step or evidence expectation; repeat as needed
.TP
.B \-\-priority <0\-4>
priority where 0 is highest and 4 is lowest; default 2
.RE
.SS NEXT
.B aj next [\-\-agent <name>]
Recommend the most relevant next item, preferring work already leased to the given agent and otherwise falling back to the highest\-priority available item.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-agent <name>
optional agent name; if provided, owned work is recommended first
.RE
.SS READY
.B aj ready [\-\-agent <name>]
Show actionable items whose dependencies are satisfied and whose lease state does not block the current agent.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-agent <name>
optional agent name; owned items for that agent are included and prioritized
.RE
.SS RECEIPT
.B aj receipt <id> \-\-summary <summary> \-\-command <command> \-\-exit\-code <code> [\-\-output <path>] [\-\-label <label>]
Record a command, exit status, and optional output file as durable evidence that a test, build, or verification step was attempted.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required compact explanation of the command result
.TP
.B \-\-command <command>
required command that was run
.TP
.B \-\-exit\-code <code>
required integer exit code from the command
.TP
.B \-\-output <path>
optional output file to copy into .aj/artifacts
.TP
.B \-\-label <label>
optional short label for the receipt
.RE
.SS RELEASE
.B aj release <id>
Remove the current lease from a local work item so another agent can claim it.
.SS REOPEN
.B aj reopen <id> \-\-summary <summary> \-\-next <action> [\-\-status <status>]
Move a done item back into active work when follow\-up or regression handling is needed.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required one\-line reopen summary
.TP
.B \-\-next <action>
required next action after reopening
.TP
.B \-\-status <status>
optional replacement status after reopening; default todo
.RE
.SS REPORT
.B aj report [\-\-agent <name>] [\-\-limit <n>]
Summarize the current local backlog with status counts plus the most relevant owned, ready, waiting, and recent work so an agent can orient quickly.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-agent <name>
optional agent name; if provided, owned and ready sections are tailored to that agent
.TP
.B \-\-limit <n>
optional max entries per report section; default 5
.RE
.SS SEARCH
.B aj search [terms...] [\-\-status <status>] [\-\-kind <kind>] [\-\-limit <n>]
Search local aj work items across titles, summaries, goals, next actions, structured context, relations, and Jira linkage so an agent can quickly find relevant existing work before creating or updating anything.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-status <status>
optional status filter: todo, in_progress, blocked, in_review, done, or canceled
.TP
.B \-\-kind <kind>
optional kind filter: bug, feature, task, spike, or epic
.TP
.B \-\-limit <n>
optional max number of matches to return; default 20
.RE
.SS SHOW
.B aj show <id> [\-\-history] [\-\-limit <n>]
Show the compact current snapshot for a single local work item, including local graph context such as parent, children, dependencies, and blocked downstream work, with optional recent event history.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-history
append recent event history after the current snapshot
.TP
.B \-\-limit <n>
optional max number of history events to show when \-\-history is used; default 5
.RE
.SS TAKE
.B aj take <id> \-\-agent <name> [\-\-ttl 4h] [\-\-force]
Attach a temporary lease to a local work item so agents can coordinate ownership and avoid duplicate effort.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-agent <name>
required agent name to assign to the lease
.TP
.B \-\-ttl <duration>
optional lease duration such as 30m or 4h; default 4h
.TP
.B \-\-force
override a currently active lease
.RE
.SS UNBLOCK
.B aj unblock <id> \-\-summary <summary> [\-\-next <action>] [\-\-status <status>]
Move a blocked item back into active work, usually after a dependency is resolved or external blocker is removed.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required one\-line unblock summary
.TP
.B \-\-next <action>
optional replacement next action
.TP
.B \-\-status <status>
optional replacement status after unblocking; default todo
.RE
.SS UNLINK
.B aj unlink <id> (\-\-depends\-on <id> | \-\-parent)
Remove one dependency edge or clear a parent link when the work graph changes and agents need the current structure to stay accurate.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-depends\-on <id>
remove one dependency edge from the item
.TP
.B \-\-parent
clear the current parent link from the item
.RE
.SS UPDATE
.B aj update <id> \-\-summary <summary> [\-\-next <action>] [\-\-status <status>]
Update a local work item summary and optionally change its next action or active status. Good updates explain what changed, what was learned, and what remains uncertain.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-summary <summary>
required one\-line progress summary
.TP
.B \-\-next <action>
optional replacement next action
.TP
.B \-\-status <status>
optional replacement status: todo, in_progress, blocked, or in_review
.RE
.SS VERSION
.B aj version
Print the current aj build version so agents and humans can confirm which binary is installed.
.SS COMMANDS
.B aj commands [\-\-format brief|json|prompt]
Show the main aj command surface in a compact format so agents can quickly discover the next command to inspect.
.SS EXAMPLES
.B aj examples [topic] [\-\-format brief|json|prompt]
Provide short example commands for the most common aj tasks and workflows.
.SS GLOSSARY
.B aj glossary [term] [\-\-format brief|json|prompt]
Explain stable terminology such as lease, sync_state, conflict, and artifact so agents do not have to infer meaning from context.
.SS HELP
.B aj help [topic] [\-\-format brief|json|prompt]
Render top\-level help, per\-command help, or topic help for workflows, examples, and glossary entries.
.SS WORKFLOWS
.B aj workflows [topic] [\-\-format brief|json|prompt]
Describe common aj sequences such as initializing a repo, claiming Jira work, or handling blockers.
.SS JIRA
.B aj jira <search|pull|push|space|link|unlink|status\-map|transitions|sync|comment> ...
Use the Jira adapter to search for likely existing issues, pull Jira issues into local aj items, push local items to Jira, manage Jira spaces, link or unlink local items, inspect status mappings and transitions, sync linked items with conflict detection, and send compact milestone comments back to Jira.
.RS
.TP
.B search <terms...> [\-\-limit <n>] [\-\-project <key>]
search Jira for existing issues, defaulting to the configured project when one is set
.TP
.B pull <key>
import a Jira issue into aj unless it is already linked
.TP
.B push <id>
create a Jira issue from a local aj item unless it is already linked
.TP
.B space exists [\-\-key <key>]
check whether a Jira space/project key already exists; defaults to the configured Jira project key when available
.TP
.B space create \-\-key <key> \-\-name <name> [\-\-type <type>] [\-\-template <template>]
create a new Jira space/project explicitly
.TP
.B space ensure \-\-key <key> \-\-name <name> [\-\-type <type>] [\-\-template <template>]
return the existing Jira space/project for a key or create it if missing
.TP
.B space ls [\-\-query <text>] [\-\-limit <n>]
list visible Jira spaces/projects, optionally filtered by a search query
.TP
.B link <id> <key> [\-\-replace]
attach an existing local item to an existing Jira issue; require \-\-replace to swap an existing link
.TP
.B unlink <id> [\-\-force]
remove the local Jira link; require \-\-force if the item has unsynced Jira state
.TP
.B status\-map
show the configured Jira\-to\-aj status mapping from .aj/config.toml
.TP
.B transitions <id>
inspect the live remote status and available Jira transitions for a linked item
.TP
.B sync <id>
sync a linked local item with Jira; use \-\-dry\-run to preview direction and Jira status transitions
.TP
.B comment <id> \-\-summary <summary>
post a compact milestone comment to the linked Jira issue
.TP
.B env: AJ_JIRA_EMAIL
email used for Jira Cloud basic auth
.TP
.B env: AJ_JIRA_API_TOKEN
API token used for Jira Cloud basic auth
.RE
.SH WORKFLOWS
.SS AUTHORING
write tickets and updates with enough context for another agent to continue the work
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Make the title describe the concrete problem or outcome, not just an activity like "work on sync".
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use the goal to explain why the work matters, then add structured fields for acceptance criteria, constraints, risks, relevant files, and verification whenever they would help another agent execute accurately.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use progress, block, handoff, and done summaries to explain what changed, what was learned, and what risk or uncertainty remains.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Make next actions concrete enough that another agent can start from them without rereading the whole codebase.
.SS BLOCKED
record and communicate blocked work
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj block <id> \-\-on <dependency> \-\-summary "..."` when work cannot proceed.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Add `\-\-next "..."` when the recovery step should be explicit instead of just waiting.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj unblock <id> \-\-summary "..." \-\-status in_progress \-\-next "..."` when the blocker is cleared.
.SS CHECKPOINT
leave a compact resume point before pausing or handing work off
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj checkpoint <id> \-\-summary "..."` when you have meaningful state another agent should inherit later.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Add `\-\-risk "..."` entries for the main uncertainties or sharp edges that remain.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Add `\-\-verify "..."` entries for the checks the next agent should run or inspect.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Add `\-\-next "..."` when the best next action changed and should be explicit in the snapshot.
.IP \[bu] 2
5. Use `aj handoff ...` after the checkpoint when ownership is actually changing.
.SS CLAIM
claim and release work so agents do not overlap
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj take <id> \-\-agent coder\-1` before starting work.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use `aj show <id>` to confirm the lease and expiry.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj release <id>` if you are handing the work back without finishing it.
.SS CORE
create and bootstrap a local aj repository
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Run `aj init` in the repository root.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. If Jira will be used, decide whether the Jira space key already exists or whether aj should create it during bootstrap.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj init \-\-jira \-\-jira\-base\-url https://example.atlassian.net \-\-jira\-space\-key SD` to reuse an existing Jira space, or add `\-\-jira\-space\-name "Software Delivery" \-\-ensure\-jira\-space` to create it when missing.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Run `aj new \-\-kind task \-\-title "..." \-\-goal "..." \-\-next "..."` to create the first item.
.IP \[bu] 2
5. Use `aj ls` to inspect the local queue.
.IP \[bu] 2
6. Use `aj show <id>` before updating or handing work off.
.SS DEPENDENCIES
declare dependency and hierarchy edges so waiting work is not recommended too early and child work stays grouped
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj link <id> \-\-depends\-on <dependency>` when work cannot start until another item is done.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use `aj link <id> \-\-parent <parent>` when the item should roll up under a larger task or epic.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj show <id>` to confirm parent, children, dependencies, and blocked downstream work are recorded the way you expect.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Use `aj unlink ...` when plans change so the graph stays accurate.
.IP \[bu] 2
5. Use `aj inbox \-\-agent coder\-1` or `aj next \-\-agent coder\-1` and let aj mark dependent work as waiting.
.SS EVIDENCE
attach proof so another agent can verify what was tried and what happened
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj receipt <id> \-\-summary "..." \-\-command "..." \-\-exit\-code <n>` after an important build, test, or verification command.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Add `\-\-output /path/to/log` when the command produced a log another agent may need to inspect.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj attach <id> \-\-path /path/to/file \-\-summary "..."` for patches, screenshots, notes, or other supporting evidence.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Use `aj show <id>` or `aj artifacts <id>` to confirm the evidence is attached with a useful summary.
.SS HANDOFF
transfer ownership without losing context
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj checkpoint <id> \-\-summary "..." \-\-risk "..." \-\-verify "..."` first when the current state needs a stronger resume point.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use `aj show <id>` before handing work off so the current snapshot is accurate.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj handoff <id> \-\-to reviewer\-1 \-\-summary "..." \-\-next "..."` to transfer the lease.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Use `aj inbox \-\-agent reviewer\-1` or `aj next \-\-agent reviewer\-1` so the receiving agent can pick it up immediately.
.SS HISTORY
inspect recent activity without scanning every item
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj changes` to see the latest repo\-wide events.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use `aj changes \-\-item <id>` when you only care about one item's activity.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj show <id>` after reading changes if you need the current snapshot too.
.SS JIRA
bootstrap Jira\-aware repos and search, import, or claim human\-created Jira work
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Set `AJ_JIRA_EMAIL` and `AJ_JIRA_API_TOKEN` for the Jira site you want aj to use.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Decide whether the Jira space key already exists. Use `aj jira space exists \-\-key SD` or `aj jira space ls \-\-query delivery` to inspect what's already there.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Bootstrap the repo with `aj init \-\-jira \-\-jira\-base\-url https://example.atlassian.net \-\-jira\-space\-key SD`, or add `\-\-jira\-space\-name "Software Delivery" \-\-ensure\-jira\-space` when the space should be created if missing.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Run `aj jira search ...` to look for likely existing Jira work before creating or linking anything new.
.IP \[bu] 2
5. Run `aj take jira ABC\-123 \-\-agent coder\-1` to import and claim human\-created work.
.IP \[bu] 2
6. Use `aj show <id>` to inspect the normalized local item.
.IP \[bu] 2
7. Use `aj jira status\-map` and `aj jira transitions <id>` to inspect the workflow before syncing.
.IP \[bu] 2
8. Use `aj update <id> \-\-summary ... \-\-next ...` to record progress, `aj jira comment <id> \-\-summary "ready for review"` for milestone updates, or `aj jira sync <id> \-\-dry\-run` to preview sync direction and status transitions.
.IP \[bu] 2
9. Use `aj jira unlink <id>` before relinking to a different Jira issue, or `aj jira link <id> <key> \-\-replace` when that swap is intentional.
.SS PROGRESS
record progress while keeping next steps explicit
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj update <id> \-\-summary "..." \-\-status in_progress \-\-next "..."` as work starts.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use `aj show <id>` to confirm the compact snapshot still reflects reality.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj done <id> \-\-summary "..."` when the item is complete.
.SS QUEUE
find the next best item without scanning the whole backlog
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj inbox \-\-agent coder\-1` to see owned, stale, waiting, and available work.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use `aj next \-\-agent coder\-1` to get one recommended item and reason.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj take <id> \-\-agent coder\-1` if the recommended item is available and you want to claim it.
.SS READY
see only work that can actually start right now
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj ready` to list actionable items whose dependencies are already satisfied.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Use `aj ready \-\-agent coder\-1` to include and prioritize work you already own.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj take <id> \-\-agent coder\-1` to claim a ready item if it is still available.
.SS REPORTING
query the local backlog without manually scanning every item
.IP \[bu] 2
1. Use `aj search ...` to find related existing work before creating a new ticket or updating an old one.
.IP \[bu] 2
2. Add `\-\-status` or `\-\-kind` filters when you want a tighter slice like blocked bugs or in\-progress features.
.IP \[bu] 2
3. Use `aj report` to get a compact repo summary with status counts plus owned, ready, waiting, and recent sections.
.IP \[bu] 2
4. Use `aj report \-\-agent coder\-1` when an individual agent needs a fast orientation pass before taking new work.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS AUTHORING
.IP \[bu] 2
Create a context\-rich item: aj new \-\-kind feature \-\-title "Align Jira status on export" \-\-goal "ensure jira push lands exported issues in the correct Jira workflow state and keep existing export\-only links repairable" \-\-next "patch export to transition after create and add regression coverage" \-\-accept "newly exported issues land in the mapped Jira status" \-\-accept "older export\-only links can be repaired with sync" \-\-constraint "do not regress import\-only links" \-\-risk "some Jira projects may not expose the desired transition name" \-\-file internal/store/item.go \-\-file internal/jira/client.go \-\-verify "run go test ./... and smoke\-test against SD"
.IP \[bu] 2
Write a useful progress update: aj update W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "export now records remote versions, but old export\-only links still need a repair path" \-\-next "treat empty last_remote_version as dirty_local and verify with a live sync"
.IP \[bu] 2
Leave a reusable checkpoint: aj checkpoint W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "status alignment is fixed; remaining risk is Jira projects without the mapped transition" \-\-next "smoke\-test a second project" \-\-risk "transition names may differ by workflow" \-\-verify "run aj jira transitions <id> before sync"
.IP \[bu] 2
Write a handoff another agent can use: aj handoff W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-to reviewer\-1 \-\-summary "status alignment is fixed; main remaining risk is Jira projects that lack the mapped transition names" \-\-next "verify the live SD board and inspect transition diagnostics output"
.SS BLOCKED
.IP \[bu] 2
Block on a dependency: aj block W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-on W\-2M9A1C7L \-\-summary "waiting on schema decision"
.IP \[bu] 2
Unblock and resume: aj unblock W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "schema approved" \-\-status in_progress \-\-next "finish cache updates"
.SS CHECKPOINT
.IP \[bu] 2
Leave a resume point: aj checkpoint W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "status alignment is fixed; remaining risk is Jira projects without the mapped transition" \-\-next "smoke\-test a second project" \-\-risk "transition names may differ by workflow" \-\-verify "run aj jira transitions <id> before sync"
.SS CLAIM
.IP \[bu] 2
Claim work: aj take W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-agent coder\-1 \-\-ttl 4h
.IP \[bu] 2
Release work: aj release W\-8F3K2P1Q
.IP \[bu] 2
Hand off work: aj handoff W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-to reviewer\-1 \-\-summary "implementation ready" \-\-next "review CLI output"
.SS DEPENDENCIES
.IP \[bu] 2
Record a dependency: aj link W\-CHILD \-\-depends\-on W\-PARENT
.IP \[bu] 2
Attach a child to an epic: aj link W\-CHILD \-\-parent W\-EPIC
.IP \[bu] 2
Remove an outdated dependency: aj unlink W\-CHILD \-\-depends\-on W\-PARENT
.IP \[bu] 2
Inspect waiting work: aj inbox \-\-agent coder\-1
.SS EVIDENCE
.IP \[bu] 2
Record a failing test receipt: aj receipt W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "cache regression still fails before the fix" \-\-command "go test ./..." \-\-exit\-code 1 \-\-output /tmp/go\-test.log \-\-label pre\-fix\-test
.IP \[bu] 2
Attach a patch for review: aj attach W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-path /tmp/cache\-fix.patch \-\-summary "candidate patch for cache invalidation review" \-\-label patch
.IP \[bu] 2
Inspect attached evidence: aj artifacts W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-limit 10
.SS HISTORY
.IP \[bu] 2
Show repo changes: aj changes \-\-limit 10
.IP \[bu] 2
Show item changes: aj changes \-\-item W\-8F3K2P1Q
.SS INIT
.IP \[bu] 2
Initialize current repository: aj init
.IP \[bu] 2
Initialize a repo from another working directory: aj \-\-repo /workspace/project init
.IP \[bu] 2
Reuse an existing Jira space during init: aj init \-\-jira \-\-jira\-base\-url https://example.atlassian.net \-\-jira\-space\-key SD
.IP \[bu] 2
Create the Jira space during init if needed: aj init \-\-jira \-\-jira\-base\-url https://example.atlassian.net \-\-jira\-space\-key SD \-\-jira\-space\-name "Software Delivery" \-\-ensure\-jira\-space
.SS JIRA
.IP \[bu] 2
Check whether a Jira space exists: aj jira space exists \-\-key SD
.IP \[bu] 2
List visible Jira spaces: aj jira space ls \-\-query delivery
.IP \[bu] 2
Create a Jira space: aj jira space create \-\-key SD \-\-name "Software Delivery"
.IP \[bu] 2
Ensure a Jira space exists: aj jira space ensure \-\-key SD \-\-name "Software Delivery"
.IP \[bu] 2
Search Jira for existing work: aj jira search cache invalidation
.IP \[bu] 2
Import and claim Jira work: aj take jira ABC\-123 \-\-agent coder\-1
.IP \[bu] 2
Import a Jira issue: aj jira pull ABC\-123
.IP \[bu] 2
Push a local item to Jira: aj jira push W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-project ABC \-\-type Task
.IP \[bu] 2
Link a local item to Jira: aj jira link W\-8F3K2P1Q ABC\-123
.IP \[bu] 2
Unlink a local Jira item: aj jira unlink W\-8F3K2P1Q
.IP \[bu] 2
Show configured Jira mapping: aj jira status\-map
.IP \[bu] 2
Show live Jira transitions: aj jira transitions W\-8F3K2P1Q
.IP \[bu] 2
Preview linked sync: aj jira sync W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-dry\-run
.IP \[bu] 2
Post a Jira milestone comment: aj jira comment W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "ready for review"
.SS NEW
.IP \[bu] 2
Create a task: aj new \-\-kind task \-\-title "Bootstrap CLI" \-\-goal "ship the first command set" \-\-next "implement item storage"
.IP \[bu] 2
Create a bug: aj new \-\-kind bug \-\-title "Fix cache invalidation" \-\-goal "restore update path invalidation" \-\-next "inspect update handler" \-\-priority 1
.SS PROGRESS
.IP \[bu] 2
Update a task: aj update W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "started implementation" \-\-status in_progress \-\-next "write tests"
.IP \[bu] 2
Complete a task: aj done W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "tests added and command shipped"
.IP \[bu] 2
Reopen completed work: aj reopen W\-8F3K2P1Q \-\-summary "regression reproduced" \-\-next "add a failing test"
.SS QUEUE
.IP \[bu] 2
Find one next item: aj next \-\-agent coder\-1
.IP \[bu] 2
Show the current inbox: aj inbox \-\-agent coder\-1
.SS READY
.IP \[bu] 2
Show ready work: aj ready
.IP \[bu] 2
Show ready work for an agent: aj ready \-\-agent coder\-1
.SS REPORTING
.IP \[bu] 2
Search local work: aj search cache invalidation
.IP \[bu] 2
Find blocked bugs: aj search regression \-\-status blocked \-\-kind bug
.IP \[bu] 2
Summarize the repo: aj report
.IP \[bu] 2
Summarize one agent's queue: aj report \-\-agent coder\-1 \-\-limit 3
.SH CONFIGURATION
aj stores repo\-local configuration in .aj/config.toml. Common Jira settings include [jira], [jira.status_map], and [jira.lifecycle].
.nf
schema_version = 1
default_output = "brief"
default_lease_ttl = "4h"

[jira]
enabled = true
base_url = "https://example.atlassian.net"
project = "ABC"

[jira.lifecycle]
comment_on_done = false
comment_on_block = false
comment_on_handoff = false
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP \[bu] 2
AJ_JIRA_EMAIL \- Jira Cloud email used for authenticated Jira commands.
.IP \[bu] 2
AJ_JIRA_API_TOKEN \- Jira Cloud API token used for authenticated Jira commands.
.IP \[bu] 2
AJ_JIRA_ENABLED \- optional override for [jira].enabled.
.IP \[bu] 2
AJ_JIRA_BASE_URL \- optional override for [jira].base_url.
.IP \[bu] 2
AJ_JIRA_PROJECT \- optional override for [jira].project.
.SH GLOSSARY
.TP
.B artifact
A file reference for logs, long notes, or generated output that is too large to keep in the compact item snapshot.
.TP
.B conflict
A sync state where both the local item and the remote Jira issue changed after the last successful sync and explicit resolution is required.
.TP
.B context\-rich update
A summary, goal, or handoff note that explains the relevant why, what changed, and what comes next so another agent can continue without rediscovering the same context.
.TP
.B lease
A temporary claim on a work item that shows which agent is actively working it and when that claim expires.
.TP
.B sync_state
The current local\-versus\-remote Jira sync status: clean, dirty_local, dirty_remote, or conflict.
.TP
.B work item
The compact local unit of work tracked by aj, including its current snapshot and append\-only event history.
.SH FILES
.IP \[bu] 2
\&.aj/config.toml \- repo\-local aj configuration.
.IP \[bu] 2
\&.aj/issues/ \- compact work item snapshots and append\-only events.
.IP \[bu] 2
\&.aj/artifacts/ \- large logs or supporting outputs referenced by items.
.SH SEE ALSO
aj \-\-help, aj examples, aj glossary, aj help jira, aj workflows
